---
stimulus_id: be_001_traditional_primary
unit_id: be_001
condition: traditional
variant: primary
example_count: 1
learner_error_scripted: false
---
Break-even analysis answers a simple question: how many units must a company
sell before it stops losing money and starts making a profit? To answer it,
you need three numbers: fixed costs, the price of one unit, and the variable
cost of producing one unit.

Fixed costs are expenses that do not change with the number of units
produced, such as rent, salaries, and insurance. Variable costs change
directly with production, such as materials, packaging, and per-unit labor.
The difference between the selling price and the variable cost of one unit
is called the contribution margin. It is the amount each unit sale
contributes toward covering fixed costs, before any profit begins.

The break-even formula divides total fixed costs by the per-unit
contribution margin:

Break-even quantity = Fixed Costs / (Price - Variable Cost)

Once enough units have been sold to cover fixed costs exactly, every
additional unit sold contributes its full margin directly to profit.

Worked example: A company has fixed costs of EUR 120,000 per year. Each unit
sells for EUR 80 and costs EUR 50 in variable costs to produce. The
contribution margin per unit is EUR 80 minus EUR 50, or EUR 30. Dividing
fixed costs by that margin gives EUR 120,000 divided by EUR 30, which is
4,000 units. The company must sell 4,000 units per year to break even.
Selling fewer than 4,000 units means a loss; selling more means a profit of
EUR 30 for every additional unit sold.

A common mistake is dividing fixed costs by price instead of by the
contribution margin, that is, forgetting to subtract variable costs first.
This ignores the fact that each unit also costs money to produce, and it
will always produce an answer that is too low.

If you get stuck on a break-even problem, work through these hints in
order.

Hint 1, general: identify the three numbers you have, fixed costs, price,
and variable cost, before doing any arithmetic.

Hint 2, more specific: compute the contribution margin first, price minus
variable cost. Do not divide by price alone.

Hint 3, most specific: divide fixed costs by the contribution margin you
just computed. The result is the number of units needed to break even.

Practice the formula until the sequence, find the margin, then divide,
becomes automatic. It is the same three-step logic behind every
break-even, target-profit, and break-even-price problem in this unit. Fixed
costs do not vanish just because sales are slow; they must be covered
before a single euro of profit exists, and the contribution margin is the
only bridge between a unit sold and that goal reached.
