---
stimulus_id: be_001_ai_substitution_primary
unit_id: be_001
condition: ai_substitution
variant: primary
example_count: 1
learner_error_scripted: true
---
TUTOR: Let's work through a break-even problem together. A company has
fixed costs of EUR 120,000 per year. Each unit sells for EUR 80 and costs
EUR 50 in variable costs. How many units must it sell to break even? Give
it a try first, then I'll walk you through it.

LEARNER: That's easy, 120,000 divided by 80 is 1,500. So the company needs
to sell 1,500 units to break even.

TUTOR: Not quite. You divided fixed costs by the selling price, but part
of that EUR 80 price pays for the variable cost of making each unit, it
does not all go toward fixed costs. Here is the full calculation. First,
find the contribution margin: price minus variable cost, EUR 80 minus EUR
50 equals EUR 30. That EUR 30 is what each unit actually contributes
toward covering fixed costs after production cost is paid. Second, divide
total fixed costs by that contribution margin instead of by price: EUR
120,000 divided by EUR 30 equals 4,000. So the company must sell 4,000
units per year to break even, not 1,500. Your instinct to divide fixed
costs by something was correct, the only fix needed is to divide by the
contribution margin, EUR 30, rather than by the full price, EUR 80.

LEARNER: I see, so 1,500 was wrong because it ignored the variable cost
entirely. I thought the whole price counted toward paying off the fixed
costs, which is where I went wrong.

TUTOR: Exactly right. Dividing by price alone assumes every euro of
revenue is free to pay off fixed costs, when in reality EUR 50 of every
EUR 80 sale is already spent on production. Only the remaining EUR 30 per
unit, the contribution margin, is available for that purpose, which is why
it belongs in the denominator instead of the price. Keep this formula
handy for the rest of the unit: break-even quantity equals fixed costs
divided by the contribution margin, and the contribution margin is always
price minus variable cost. Apply that same two-step method, find the
margin, then divide, to the practice problem that follows this one, and
you will arrive at the correct break-even quantity directly without
needing to try a different approach first. If the numbers ever change,
recompute the margin before you divide, never divide fixed costs by price
alone. Fixed costs, price, and variable cost are the only three inputs
this formula ever needs, so write them down first and the rest of the
calculation follows in just two short steps.
